Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to learn how to make a plug in or theme easy to translate into another
language, there are two main steps involved here.
Number one is sort of hollowing out the code of our plug in so that it's flexible.
And step number two is just using software that can automatically create sort of a template file so
that it's simple for just about anyone to contribute a translated version of our plug in.
Let's go ahead and get started with step number one, which is us sort of hollowing out our code.
Now, we're not going to hollow out the entirety of our plug in because that would be super repetitive.
Instead, I'm just going to pick two little pieces of text that will make flexible or translatable.
It's something that when you do once, you'll know how to do it anywhere and everywhere that you need
to.
So, for example, one string of text in our plug in that I'm going to make translatable in the admin
dashboard if you look in the settings menu.
Remember, we have this link called word count that points towards our setting page.
Well, let's make this actual text right here translatable.
So, for example, if someone was using our plug in and their installation of WordPress is using the
Spanish language, well, assuming our plug in has been translated into Spanish, it should output Spanish
right here.
OK, and then on the front end, just for another quick example, in our post info or word count statistics,
let's just translate this first sentence that says this post has X number of words.
So just hollowing out those two pieces of text will show you everything you need to know to make your
entire plug in our theme translatable.
OK, so at this point, let's get started.
Let's jump into our text editor.
And our very first step is to add a new couple of lines up at the very top within these comments.
So we currently have these properties like plug in name and description.
Let's just add a new property and it needs to be named text domain Colen.
And now you can make up your own name.
But I'm going to call it WCP Domain.
I'm just making this up.
It's short for word count, plugin domain.
So just choose something that's unique to your plugin or theme.
OK, and then we want one other property.
It is Domain Path column and let's give it a value of slash languages.
So this is just going to point towards a folder in our plugin folder and it will be a new folder called
Languages.
This will contain sort of the overall translation template and then any and all translated versions
that we create.
So maybe Spanish or German.
Cool.
So it just these two comments in place.
We're ready to get started.
Let's begin hollowing out a few strings of text in our plugin.
So remember, let's begin with the admin link under the Settings menu.
This text right here that says word count.
So in our plugin code down towards the bottom, I'm just looking for our function that we named admin
page.
And when we're adding an options page here, the second argument.
So here's what we do.
Let's remove this string of text that just says word count.
And instead we're going to use a function that's just underscore, underscore, so to underscores and
then we just call it and now we give it to arguments.
So A comma, B is placeholders.
The first argument is the original text.
So we're creating this plugin originally in English.
So we would just say that text we had just a moment ago, word count.
And then the second argument is your plug or theme's text domain.
So remember, I named mine WCP Domain.
Cool.
That's it.
We just made that little piece of text or that string dynamic and easily translatable.
Let's move on to the second example.
Remember, we want to make this text that says this post has blank words, easy to translate.
So back in our code, let's look in our function that we named create HTML.
Here it is.
And then we're looking for the word count.
For me, it's around line number forty.
It will be a little bit different for you, but we see this post has and now you'll notice that we sort
of hardcoded the empty space within this string.
Now, when people are providing translations for our code, we don't want them to have to unintuitive.
We have an empty space at the end of their translation.
So let's adjust this a little bit.
So let's get rid of that space here and then let's just add on an empty space like this.
So now this can just be sort of the hollowed out placeholder, so let's get rid of this very first string
and we'll use underscore, underscore, just call the function.
So we'll say this post has.
And then the second argument is our text domain.
WCP domain.
Cool.
Let's do the same thing.
Four words at the end.
So again, we want to begin with an empty space.
The words don't run together.
So let's just cabinet on an empty space and then concatenate on this so we don't need the space there
anymore.
Now, we don't need to translate the period at the end of the sentence or the HTML B.R. tag.
So let's just end the quote here and then concatenate on just an opening quote like this.
So that way, when people are providing translations for our code, they're only translating this little
piece of text right here, just the word words.
So now we can get rid of that and instead say underscore, underscore, call it words.
Second argument is our WCP domain.
OK, so we've hollowed out those two examples now before we save this file and I show you how to actually
begin providing a translation in whatever language you want to experiment with.
I'm going to choose Spanish.
Before we get to that.
There's just one more step.
So let's go back up to the top of this file.
We just need to add a little bit of code to tell WordPress to actually load our text domain files.
We don't have any language files yet.
But in just a moment when we actually go create a translation, we'll want to make sure that WordPress
loads those files.
Right.
So that way, when you go into the settings of your WordPress installation and if you switch the WordPress
system language to Spanish, ah, plug ins should know to just be automatically loading our translated
files.
So here's how we do that within our constructor function.
Let's just add a new top level action.
So I'm going to say add action, semicolon the name, let's just use the init action hook, OK, and
then let's use the callable syntax.
So Arae dollar sign this comma.
Let's make up a method name.
I'll just call it languages.
You could call it anything you want to.
And now let's create a function with that name.
So function, languages, parentheses, curly brackets.
And here we're just going to use a WordPress function called lowed, underscore plugin, underscore
text domain parentheses to call it semicolon.
And we're going to give it three arguments.
So a comma be Comikaze placeholders.
The first argument is our text domain.
So again, I chose a value of WCP domain.
The second argument, I'm actually not one hundred percent sure what this is in the WordPress documentation.
It just says deprecated and it instructs you to use a value of false.
So that's what I'm going to go with.
If you're super curious about this, you can just perform a Google search for this function name to
find the official WordPress documentation.
OK, and then the third argument is just a path that points towards our languages folder.
So instead of C, we can say Dürer name call that function inside these parentheses, we can say plug
in underscore based name, which is a function itself.
So call that inside these parentheses, let's say underscore, underscore, phial, underscore, underscore,
OK.
And then after these two parentheses, but before the final third closing parentheses, let's add on
a string of text slash languages.
If this was hard to type out with me, that's OK.
You can always download the zip file for this video lesson to just copy and paste the code from my code.
OK, now I believe the translation software will create this folder for us if it doesn't exist.
But just to play it safe in our plugin folder, why don't we go ahead and create it right now?
So go ahead and create a brand new folder in your plugin folder and let's call it languages.
OK, at this point, we're ready to save our file and learn how to actually create a translation.
Now, there are many, many different ways to create a translation, but I'd say the two most common
are, number one, a piece of software named PO.
Edit it's available for Windows, Mac and Linux.
So that's one way to create a translation.
The second way, which is the way I'm going to show you in this video lesson is to use a WordPress plugin
called Logo Translate.
Now, there's nothing wrong with PO edit.
I'm just a huge fan of this logo translate plugin.
I feel like it's really optimized for WordPress.
It's attention to detail is excellent.
And as will even see in our next chapter, this plugin makes it easy to even translate for our JavaScript
code.
So I'm a big fan of this plugin.
I strongly recommend that you use it.
So let's go install this plug in right now.
So in the admin dashboard, I'll go under plug ins, add new, I will search for logo translate.
It should be the first result as of today.
It's by Tim Whitlock and you can see it has over one million active installation.
So let's go ahead and install, OK, and then be sure to activate the plug in.
OK, now in the admin dashboard down towards the very bottom, you'll see a new option called logo translate.
Let's go ahead and click on that.
So, yes, you can also use this plug in to translate a theme, but right now we're interested in translating
a plug in.
So if you scroll down towards the bottom here, running plug ins here, we see our test plug in and
we know it's the plug in that we were just recently working on because we see that it's text domain.
Is that familiar WCP domain.
So let's just go ahead and click on our test plug in.
OK, now, before we actually create a translation, let's first create a template.
So Local Translate will look through our code for whenever we used the underscore underscore function,
it will do a lot of the hard work for us so we can just click create template.
Cool.
You can see it's going to create the template file in our plugins folder.
In the languages folder.
Let's click create template.
OK, now, with that template created, we can actually create a translation again, I'm going to use
Spanish.
So if you want to follow along with me, let's just click new language.
So option number one, choose a language.
I'm going to click here.
The list of languages is very long, but if you just start to type all type Spanish, it's a very long
list.
It's actually falling off the bottom edge of my screen right now.
But if I click it, you can see that I chose Spanish Mexico.
OK, then for option number two, I like to use this author option so you can see it's going to output
the file into our plugins folder, our actual plug in folder and then in the languages subfolder.
This is the option we want, right?
As a plug in author this is excellent.
So let's click start translating.
And this is the moment we've been waiting for, so this area down here has all of the different strings
of text that detected.
And if we want to translate one, let's go with, for example, this post has.
So you just click on that.
So here is the source text.
But then down here, this is where we can enter the translation.
So I will just type HESTA in Trona DNA.
Right.
So just this post has in Spanish.
OK, let's also be sure to translate the word words, so I'll click on words right here.
So down here, the Spanish translation of that is puzzle for us.
OK, and then finally, let's translate the word count.
Remember, this is the admin dashboard setting link text so we can just click on that for the translation.
I will say El Quinto de la.
OK, for now I'm done.
So just scroll up and click save.
Obviously in the real world, if you were truly translating a theme or plug in, you would probably
fill in 10, 20, 30 or even 50 translations.
But we're just setting up a few as a quick example.
OK, so once you save your changes now let's pretend that we actually are using WordPress with this
language.
So instead of English, let's go in to the WordPress settings screen.
You don't even need to go into the submenu links, just the general main overview settings screen of
WordPress, if you scroll down a little bit.
Maybe about halfway down the page, we see an option named site language, so minus that to English.
But let's click on this and then I'm just going to search for Spanish of Mexico and now be ready to
see WordPress in a different language.
So maybe try to memorize where certain things are.
But let's click save changes.
Right.
So we're simulating that someone is using our plugin and their WordPress is in a different language.
So you can see the entire admin dashboard is now in that language.
Well, aside from my custom post types, because I didn't actually translate that code, but all of
the default options in WordPress have been translated.
And let's look for our word count translation.
So under the settings menu, remember the very last link?
Perfect.
There it is.
So this is word count translated into Spanish.
Let's look on the front end of our website.
So if you refresh a single blog post detail screen perfect.
So this post has X number of words.
Cool.
And if we look in our plugin folder in the languages subfolder, here is our overall template file.
So people who are used to translating software, you can just give them this file and they will know
what to do with it.
And then oftentimes they will supply you with this sort of file.
Right, these files ending in Dortmunder or Doppio.
So if you have your plug in or theme translated into 10 or 20 different languages, then you would want
to include.
Right.
10 or 20 different versions of these files in your plugin code like we have here.
This way, no matter which language the user's WordPress installation is set to, you have them covered.
Cool.
Now, before we bring this lesson to a close, there is one security related issue that I want to bring
to your attention.
So let's say that somehow, some way, one of the translated files that you're using has been compromised
or has malicious code in it.
In this case, maybe just a bit of HTML like a stronger Balde tag.
That's not very malicious.
But imagine it could be a script tag.
The possibilities are endless, but really quick.
I just want to show you how and why you would maybe escape text that's coming from a translation when
you're actually outputting it as HTML.
So for a quick example, let's go edit the translation for this astar and try to TNA.
So if we go back into logo translate.
And we click on our test plug in and we click on the Espanol.
So let's find that this post has now imagine if we just wrapped the word and Trada in a strong tag,
obviously that in and of itself isn't malicious.
But imagine if someone used a script tag and tried to include actual code.
So this is just an example of proof of concept.
But if we save this and then if we refresh, oh, notice that that actually did make the text bold,
implying that text from the translation file is actually rendering as HTML, which is a potential security
issue.
So we just want to make sure that we escape this.
So back in our code, let's look for our create HTML method.
Right in here is the word count.
You can see we're using this translation function to underscore, underscore, instead of just underscore,
underscore.
There's actually a function called E for escape, underscore, html and then underscore, underscore.
So just by changing which function we use here.
Now if we save and refresh, we're getting that same translation factor right.
It's pulling from the Spanish translation, but now it's not letting any actual HTML be rendered.
It's escaping this into similar characters.
So we're a bit more secure now and that is going to bring this lesson to a close.
So feel free to set your WordPress installation back to whatever language you were using before we started
this lesson.
So I will go back into general settings and just set my language back to English.
Cool, let's talk about where we go from here, so into our very next lesson, because practice makes
perfect, we're going to start on a new plug in and we're still going to be focusing on for just this
one more plug in before we jump into the next chapter, which is about JavaScript.
So let me give you a sneak peak preview in our next lesson.
The based plug in that we're going to create is this word filter.
There are two big things that make this plugin unique or different from the plug in we just built.
So No.
One, if I click onto the settings page, this settings page is not using the WordPress generated form
builder.
So remember all of those confusing functions like section and field and having WordPress automatically
loop through them.
Now there are pros and cons to the auto generated WordPress form pages.
WordPress will automatically handle things for you, like the nonce, different security issues, the
form submission.
However, there are times where you want to have full control over things.
So we're going to learn how to have a completely custom settings page with all of our own code, both
the HTML and the that's processing the data.
OK, the other thing that's unique about this plug in is we're actually getting a top level menu in
the admin dashboard sidebar and we're actually going to learn how to have our own SPG icon instead of
a generic dash icon.
This should be a lot of fun to set up.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you then.